Update Getting started - Software overview with Lightning content (#473)
BitcoinDesign/Guide: guide/getting-started/software.md

# Software overview

The unique history and architecture of Bitcoin has resulted in several categories of software, with each one serving a distinct purpose. Provided below is an overview of standard and specialized application categories.

> ## Command-line interfaces (CLI)

Reviewer: Will you be re-organizing each section by most used as mentioned in the Google doc?

Author: Ah yes. Forgot about that!

# Software overview

The unique history and architecture of Bitcoin has resulted in several categories of software, with each one serving a distinct purpose. Provided below is an overview of standard and specialized application categories.

## Wallets

<div class="center" markdown="1">

{% include image.html
   image = "/assets/images/guide/getting-started/software/wallet-example.jpg"
   retina = "/assets/images/guide/getting-started/software/wallet-example@2x.jpg"
   alt-text = "Illustrative interface of a wallet application"
   caption = "Wallets allow users to send, receive, and manage transactions."
   width = 400
   height = 396
   layout = "float-right-desktop"
%}

> Wallets are perhaps the most important Bitcoin applications. They provide easy-to-use graphical user interfaces (GUIs) designed for broad audiences that let bitcoin owners send, receive, store and manage their coins.

Reviewer 2: Adding a bit of cross-refferencing.
```suggestion
Wallets are perhaps the most important Bitcoin applications. They provide easy-to-use graphical user interfaces (GUIs) designed for broad audiences that let bitcoin owners [send]({{ '/guide/payments/send/' | relative_url }}), [receive]({{ '/guide/payments/receive/' | relative_url }}) store and manage their coins.
```

Wallet features vary by application but always include wallet setup, balance and transaction records, and the ability to send and receive bitcoin. The full range of features that wallets may support is broad and includes security and privacy options, currency exchange features, accounting tools, interoperability, accessibility, and localization options.

> Few wallets support the full range of features. The reasons for this can vary from; standards not being available when the wallet was first developed (newer address formats or HD wallets for example), the choice to not include anything that implies trusting a third party, or simply because it does not fit the intended use case for the software.

Reviewer 2: Adding links since the paragraph tries to explain some terms reader going through the Getting Started may not understand. 

```suggestion
Few wallets support the full range of features. The reasons for this can vary from; standards not being available when the wallet was first developed (newer [address formats]({{ '/guide/glossary/address/' | relative_url }}) or [HD wallets]({{ '/guide/glossary/wallet/#hd-wallet' | relative_url }}) for example), the choice to not include anything that implies trusting a third party, or simply because it does not fit the intended use case for the software.
```

The features you include should be based on the needs of your users. Try to maximize interoperability with other Bitcoin products by supporting modern standards and emerging technologies. For example, a wallet project started today should almost certainly support the Lightning network.

Due to Bitcoin’s open-source nature, anyone with the technical skills can develop a Bitcoin wallet. Many code libraries are available to simplify this task.

</div>

## Exchanges

<div class="center" markdown="1">

> Exchanges let users swap between currencies and networks (for example USD to bitcoin, or from the base layer to the Lightning network. They typically fall in three general categories. Consumer-focused exchanges let users make trades directly with the exchange. This is ideal for occasional use.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Exchanges let users swap between currencies and networks (for example USD to bitcoin, or from the base layer to the Lightning network). They typically fall in three general categories. Consumer-focused exchanges let users make trades directly with the exchange. This is ideal for occasional use.
```

> Exchanges let users swap between currencies and networks (for example USD to bitcoin, or from the base layer to the Lightning network. They typically fall in three general categories. Consumer-focused exchanges let users make trades directly with the exchange. This is ideal for occasional use.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Exchanges let users swap between currencies and networks (USD to bitcoin, or from the base layer to the Lightning network. They typically fall into three general categories. Consumer-focused exchanges let users make trades directly with the exchange. This is ideal for occasional use.
```

Author: This makes it read like these are the only swaps possible. I'll reject this for now as it also misses a ) that was added in another commit.

{% include image.html
   image = "/assets/images/guide/getting-started/software/exchange-example.jpg"
   retina = "/assets/images/guide/getting-started/software/exchange-example@2x.jpg"
   alt-text = "Illustrative interface for exchanging bitcoin"
   caption = 'Exchanges allow for trading between different currencies. Texture by [Bilal O.](https://unsplash.com/@lightcircle){:target="_blank" rel="nofollow"} on [Unsplash](https://unsplash.com){:target="_blank" rel="nofollow"}.'
   width = 400
   height = 388
   layout = "float-right-desktop"
%}

Exchanges focused on investors and traders usually list many different cryptocurrencies. They allow users to trade with each other by submitting buy and sell requests on currency pairs. These products are generally for experienced users. They offer complex trading features and countless ways to analyze price movements.

Decentralized exchanges fall in between these categories, focusing on occasional use or trading, but are, as their name implies, based on an open marketplace without a central authority.

</div>

## Explorers

If the blockchain is a public database, explorers are simply windows into that database.

> For Bitcoin, block explorers let users view transaction data, latest blocks, block height, and so on. They also provide insight into bigger picture activity on the Bitcoin network, such as daily transaction numbers. For example, there are typically fewer transactions on weekends, which results in lower fees, which are ideal for low-priority transactions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For Bitcoin, block explorers let users view transaction data, latest blocks, block height, and so on. They also provide insight into bigger picture activity on the Bitcoin network, such as daily transaction numbers. For example, there are typically fewer transactions on weekends, resulting in lower fees, ideal for low-priority transactions.
```

As transactions in Lightning payment channels are not recorded on the blockchain, there are also Lightning network explorers. These let you see public information about the nodes and the network, such as channel count, capacity and status. Only participant nodes can look up specific transaction information in a channel.

{% include image.html
   image = "/assets/images/guide/getting-started/software/explorer-example.jpg"
   retina = "/assets/images/guide/getting-started/software/explorer-example@2x.jpg"
   alt-text = "Illustrative interface for block explorer software"

>    caption = 'Explorers offer insight into activiy on the Bitcoin and Lightning networks. Texture by [Mike van den Bos](https://unsplash.com/@mike_van_den_bos){:target="_blank" rel="nofollow"} on [Unsplash](https://unsplash.com){:target="_blank" rel="nofollow"}.'

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   caption = 'Explorers offer insight into activity on the Bitcoin and Lightning networks. Texture by [Mike van den Bos](https://unsplash.com/@mike_van_den_bos){:target="_blank" rel="nofollow"} on [Unsplash](https://unsplash.com){:target="_blank" rel="nofollow"}.'
```

# Software overview

The unique history and architecture of Bitcoin has resulted in several categories of software, with each one serving a distinct purpose. Provided below is an overview of standard and specialized application categories.

## Wallets

<div class="center" markdown="1">

{% include image.html
   image = "/assets/images/guide/getting-started/software/wallet-example.jpg"
   retina = "/assets/images/guide/getting-started/software/wallet-example@2x.jpg"
   alt-text = "Illustrative interface of a wallet application"
   caption = "Wallets allow users to send, receive, and manage transactions."
   width = 400
   height = 396
   layout = "float-right-desktop"
%}

> Wallets are perhaps the most important Bitcoin applications. They provide easy-to-use graphical user interfaces (GUIs) designed for broad audiences that let bitcoin owners [send]({{ '/guide/payments/send/' | relative_url }}), [receive]({{ '/guide/payments/receive/' | relative_url }}) store and manage their coins.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Wallets are perhaps the most important Bitcoin applications. They provide easy-to-use graphical user interfaces (GUIs) designed for broad audiences that let bitcoin owners [send]({{ '/guide/payments/send/' | relative_url }}), [receive]({{ '/guide/payments/receive/' | relative_url }}), store and manage their coins.
```

> Wallet features vary by application but always include wallet setup, balance and transaction records, and the ability to send and receive bitcoin. The full range of features that wallets may support is broad and includes security and privacy options, currency exchange features, accounting tools, interoperability, accessibility, and localization options.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Wallet features vary by application but always include [wallet setup]({{ '/guide/onboarding/introduction/' | relative_url }}), balance and transaction records, and the ability to [send]({{ '/guide/payments/send/' | relative_url }}) and [receive]({{ '/guide/payments/receive/' | relative_url }}) bitcoin. The full range of features that wallets may support is broad and includes security and [privacy]({{ '/guide/payments/privacy/' | relative_url }}) options, currency exchange features, accounting tools, [interoperability]({{ '/guide/designing-products/principles/#interoperability' | relative_url }}), accessibility, and localization options.
```
What do you think about adding all these cross-references? Since this is an introductory page, it might be appropriate to have a lot of links, in case something sparks the readers interest.

Reviewer 3: We could also links to the "Common user flows" page, which remains a bit more top-level than linking directly to the Payments section, etc.

Author: Links are good, changed the onboarding to the Common user flow page, better start.

<div class="center" markdown="1">

Exchanges let users swap between currencies and networks (for example USD to bitcoin, or from the base layer to the Lightning network). They typically fall in three general categories.

{% include image.html
   image = "/assets/images/guide/getting-started/software/exchange-example.jpg"
   retina = "/assets/images/guide/getting-started/software/exchange-example@2x.jpg"
   alt-text = "Illustrative interface for exchanging bitcoin"
   caption = 'Exchanges allow for trading between different currencies. Texture by [Bilal O.](https://unsplash.com/@lightcircle){:target="_blank" rel="nofollow"} on [Unsplash](https://unsplash.com){:target="_blank" rel="nofollow"}.'
   width = 400
   height = 388
   layout = "float-right-desktop"
%}

Consumer-focused exchanges let users buy and sell directly with the exchange. This is good for occasional use.

Exchanges focused on investors and traders usually list many different cryptocurrencies. They allow users to trade with each other by submitting buy and sell orders on currency pairs. These products are generally for experienced users. They offer complex trading features and ways to analyze price movements.

> Decentralized exchanges focus on occasional use or trading, but are, as their name implies, based on an open marketplace without a central authority.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Decentralized exchanges focus on occasional use or trading, and are, as their name implies, based on an open marketplace without a central authority.
```
"But" sounds like there's a negative statement coming up, so how about "and"?

For Bitcoin, block explorers let users view transaction data, latest blocks, block height, and so on. They also provide insight into bigger picture activity on the Bitcoin network, such as daily transaction numbers. For example, there are typically fewer transactions on weekends, resulting in lower fees, ideal for low-priority transactions.

As transactions in Lightning payment channels are not recorded on the blockchain, there are also Lightning network explorers. These let you see public information about the nodes and the network, such as channel count, capacity and status. Only participant nodes can look up specific transaction information in a channel.

{% include image.html
   image = "/assets/images/guide/getting-started/software/explorer-example.jpg"
   retina = "/assets/images/guide/getting-started/software/explorer-example@2x.jpg"
   alt-text = "Illustrative interface for block explorer software"
   caption = 'Explorers offer insight into activity on the Bitcoin and Lightning networks. Texture by [Mike van den Bos](https://unsplash.com/@mike_van_den_bos){:target="_blank" rel="nofollow"} on [Unsplash](https://unsplash.com){:target="_blank" rel="nofollow"}.'
   width = 800

>    height = 388

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
   height = 492
```

   height = 350
%}

## Explorers

If the blockchain is a public database, explorers are simply windows into that database.

> For Bitcoin, so-called block explorers let users view data about specific transactions, latest blocks, block height, and so on. They also provide insight into bigger picture activity on the Bitcoin network, such as daily transaction numbers. For example, there are typically fewer transactions on weekends, which results in lower fees, which are ideal for low-priority transactions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For Bitcoin, block explorers let users view transaction data, latest blocks, block height, and so on. They also provide insight into bigger picture activity on the Bitcoin network, such as daily transaction numbers. For example, there are typically fewer transactions on weekends, which results in lower fees, which are ideal for low-priority transactions.
```

> As transactions in Lightning payment channels are not recorded on the blockchain, there are also Lightning network explorers. These let you see public information about the network, such as channel count, capacity and status. Only participant nodes can look up specific transaction information in a channel.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As transactions in Lightning payment channels are not recorded on the blockchain, there are also Lightning network explorers. These let you see public information about the nodes and the network, such as channel count, capacity and status. Only participant nodes can look up specific transaction information in a channel.
```

It would be handy to add some details about explorers like Amboss.space which allow users to 'register' their nodes and get extra benefits from doing so (such as having a page with social contacts). Not sure if you would class lightning.terminal as a explorer but if you do you could also say that they can give users insights into their own nodes so that they have better manage them.

</div>

## Nodes

<div class="center" markdown="1">

{% include image.html
   image = "/assets/images/guide/getting-started/software/node-ui-example.jpg"
   retina = "/assets/images/guide/getting-started/software/node-ui-example@2x.jpg"
   alt-text = "Illustrative interface for node software"
   caption = 'Node applications connect to and participate in the bitcoin network. Texture by [okeykat](https://unsplash.com/@okeykat){:target="_blank" rel="nofollow"} on [Unsplash](https://unsplash.com){:target="_blank" rel="nofollow"}.'
   width = 400
   height = 426
   layout = "float-right-desktop"
%}

> Bitcoin [node]({{ '/guide/glossary/node/' | relative_url }}) software connects to and participates in the Bitcoin network. [Full nodes]({{ '/guide/glossary/node/#full-nodes/' | relative_url }}) verify transaction data on the blockchain and ensure the Bitcoin rules are being followed by network participants. A [light node]({{ '/guide/glossary/node/#light-nodes/' | relative_url }}) connects to the Bitcoin network but does not verify or enforce the rules. Some wallet software comes with built-in full node capabilities, such as [Bitcoin Core]({{ '/guide/glossary/#bitcoin-core-client/' | relative_url }}), but most wallet software act as light nodes. 

Reviewer 2: Attempting to re-word to simplify a bit.
```suggestion
Bitcoin [node]({{ '/guide/glossary/node/' | relative_url }}) software connects to and participates in the Bitcoin network. [Full nodes]({{ '/guide/glossary/node/#full-nodes/' | relative_url }}) verify transaction data on the blockchain and ensure network participants are following the Bitcoin rules. A [light node]({{ '/guide/glossary/node/#light-nodes/' | relative_url }}) connects to the Bitcoin network but does not verify or enforce the rules. Some wallet software comes with built-in full node capabilities, such as [Bitcoin Core]({{ '/guide/glossary/#bitcoin-core-client/' | relative_url }}), but most wallet software act as light nodes. 
```

> Bitcoin [node]({{ '/guide/glossary/node/' | relative_url }}) software connects to and participates in the Bitcoin network. [Full nodes]({{ '/guide/glossary/node/#full-nodes/' | relative_url }}) verify transaction data on the blockchain and ensure the Bitcoin rules are being followed by network participants. A [light node]({{ '/guide/glossary/node/#light-nodes/' | relative_url }}) connects to the Bitcoin network but does not verify or enforce the rules. Some wallet software comes with built-in full node capabilities, such as [Bitcoin Core]({{ '/guide/glossary/#bitcoin-core-client/' | relative_url }}), but most wallet software act as light nodes. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Bitcoin [node]({{ '/guide/glossary/node/' | relative_url }}) software connects to and participates in the Bitcoin network. Nodes typically download and broadcast user transactions, and optionally help verify blockchain data more broadly. Some wallet software comes with built-in node capabilities, such as [Bitcoin Core]({{ '/guide/glossary/#bitcoin-core-client/' | relative_url }}), but most wallet software connects to external nodes. Learn more on the [Node page]({{ '/guide/glossary/node/' | relative_url }}) in the glossary.
```
I find the full/light node info too detailed for this page. It's meant to provide a light overview and jumping-off points deep down into the endless depths the guide.

I tried to replace it with a simple statement about what a node does (download and broadcast transactions), with the addition that it can optionally do verification (and other tuff). Let's deep-link into the nodes page for the details.

Author: Addressing in fresh commit as this has got outdated.

   layout = "float-right-desktop"
%}

> A Bitcoin [node]({{ '/guide/glossary/node/' | relative_url }}) is simply a computer running software, like [Bitcoin Core]({{ '/guide/glossary/#bitcoin-core-client'}}) connecting in to the Bitcoin network. Nodes verify transaction data on the Bitcoin blockchain and ensure the Bitcoin rules are being followed by network participants. Some wallets have built-in nodes, and some node software comes packaged with wallet functionality. However, the minimum implementation of a Bitcoin node is syncing data and allowing other software a user has to access it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Bitcoin [node]({{ '/guide/glossary/node/' | relative_url }}) software is simply software that connects to and participates in the Bitcoin network. [Full nodes]({{ '/guide/glossary/node/#full-nodes/' | relative_url }}) verify transaction data on the Bitcoin blockchain and ensure the Bitcoin rules are being followed by network participants. A [light node]({{ '/guide/glossary/node/#light-nodes/' | relative_url }}) connects to the Bitcoin network but does not verify or enforce the rules of the Bitcoin network. Some wallet software comes with built-in full node capabilities, such as [Bitcoin Core]({{ '/guide/glossary/#bitcoin-core-client/' | relative_url }}), but most wallet software act as light nodes. 
```

Made it more software contextual / technically accurate rather than simply describing what a node is.

Author: I removed some repeating words and committing.

> A Lightning node is a device running software connecting it to the Lightning network, which extends Bitcoin with payment channels to improve transaction speed and lower costs. It is becoming widely adopted and accepted as the preferred way to scale Bitcoin.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Lightning node software is software that connects to and participates in the Lightning network, which extends Bitcoin with payment channels to increases transaction speed and lower costs. It is becoming widely adopted and accepted as the preferred way to scale Bitcoin.
```

Made it more software contextual rather than simply describing what a node is.

Author: Removed repeating words (software) and committing.

> It’s common to use node management software. This simplifies the setup, management and monitoring of nodes by providing graphical user interfaces to interact with the lower level node software instead of CLIs.

Reviewer: I would dedicate a whole section to this and go into the nuances of how one can operate their node (personal, merchant, routing node for example). Whole lot of detail here that is missing imo.

Author: None of the other sections go into that much detail about HOW to run the software.
If others agree we should cover the details here, then lets review if we should have a separate 'Node management' section.

Author: For now I separated the node management info into its own paragraph in f593a43.

Reviewer 3: Whole section as in a separate guide section or page? We have the node page in the glossary already, and I agree with Daniel to keep this overview page light. People can click through to read more.

Reviewer: Lightning node software and Lightning node management software are two distinct categories. Not saying go into great detail but I think it's relevant enough to have its own section on this page. Later on we could have a dedicated page that goes into the different node operation modes in detail similar to how we have a node page in the glossary.

   layout = "float-right-desktop"
%}

> Bitcoin mining is the act of confirming the next block in the blockchain by being the first to solve a computationally intense math problem. The successful miner receives a block reward and the fees for the transactions contained in the new block in bitcoin.

Reviewer: This just explains what mining is, not what mining software is. Would be better to explain the nuances of the different types of software you can run on mining hardware - should also cross link that with the hardware overview section on miners.

Author: This paragraph was added to aid in making sense of the one about Ligtning in the same section.
Can remove if it's seen as unnecessary.

Reviewer 2: I agree with both of you. I think if we were to add `mining` here, we probably would want to add content specific to mining `software`, since mining was already covered on a few other pages.

However, I don't think application builders need to know the details of mining software in order to build applications. Mining software, is something that should concern miners only, so my vote is to, take out this paragraph, but re-use it perhaps in the tech primer PR #415

Author: OK, will delete.

Reviewer 3: Posted a suggestion below (keeping the text in a shortened version with a link to the tech primer).

> Bitcoin mining is the act of confirming the next block in the blockchain by being the first to solve a computationally intense math problem. The successful miner receives a block reward and the fees for the transactions contained in the new block in bitcoin.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Bitcoin [mining]({{ '/guide/getting-started/technology-primer/#how-are-transactions-confirmed' | relative_url }}) is the act of confirming transactions by solving a computationally intense problem, which is rewarded via freshly minted bitcoin and transaction fees.
```
Wouldn't let me make a suggestion on the previous thread, so posting it as a new comment. How about shortening it and linking to the tech primer (as @Bosch-0 suggested)?

Author: Will update in a new commit as this became outdated when I removed that paragraph.

Mining has become primarily a professional undertaking with dedicated software to manage racks of mining hardware. However, some wallets still offer mining features, and there are also cloud mining providers that allow customers to rent mining capacity.

> For the Lightning network, transaction confirmation by mining is only required when opening or closing a channel. Instead, node operators are incentivized to maintain payment channels with sufficient liquidity to other nodes by the option to charge a small fee for allowing payments to be routed through them when no direct channel exists between sender and receiver.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Mining does not exist for transactions on the Lightning network, so there is no equivalent software. However, opening and closing payment channels on Lightning involve transactions, that need to be mined on the Bitcoin network.
```
Tried to shorten this a bit and remove some detail that can be addressed elsewhere.

   layout = "float-right-desktop"
%}

Bitcoin [mining]({{ '/guide/getting-started/technology-primer/#how-are-transactions-confirmed' | relative_url }}) is the act of confirming transactions by solving a computationally intense problem, which is rewarded via freshly minted bitcoin and transaction fees.

> Mining has become primarily a professional undertaking with dedicated software to manage racks of mining hardware. However, some wallets still offer mining features, and there are also cloud mining providers that allow customers to rent mining capacity.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Mining has become primarily a professional undertaking with dedicated software to manage racks of [mining hardware]({{ '/guide/getting-started/hardware/#miners' | relative_url }}). However, some wallets still offer mining features, and there are also cloud mining providers that allow customers to rent mining capacity.
```
